---
title: 'A Question of Will: Laboria Cuboniks in Bratislava'
author: Olivia Lucca Fraser
date: 2019-04-10
tags: [xenofeminism, memetics, ethics]
abstract: Transcript of a talk we gave in Bratislava, in the Spring of 2017.
---

# Techno-Materialist, Anti-Naturalist, Gender-Abolitionist

**HH:** We're going to start not by jumping straight into the question of
will, but instead by outlining what we do as a collective and by sketching out
the broad perimeters of our project, which we call xenofeminism.


We are an international feminist working group. There are six of us -- one is
missing today -- and we are spread across three continents and five countries.
The project we're trying to work on, XF, is really an attempt to articulate an
emancipatory gender politics fit for an era of globality, complexity, and
technology -- one which thinks about technology as an activist tool whilst
attempting to confront a contemporary reality cross-hatched with fiber optic
cables, radio and micro-waves, oil and gas pipelines, aerial and shipping routes
and the unrelenting simultaneous execution of millions of communication
protocols with every passing millisecond. In short, to situate a feminist
politics within the reality of the 21st century.


So, what is XF? In the collective, all six of us, have slightly different
versions of what we think XF is and what it involves (or should involve). So,
I'm going to articulate what I think of as my version of XF, and then Diann is
going to add her account with the help of audio-visual material.


So, XF is a techno-materialist, anti-naturalist and gender-abolitionist form of
feminism. What do I mean by these three terms?

## Techno-Materialist 

The project is techno-materialist in the sense that is seeks to develop a
critical approach to technologies and to think about the different kind of
impacts technologies can have upon women, queers, and the gender
non-conforming. XF does not reject technology, or science, or rationalism
(ideas more usually understood as patriarchal constructs), but instead takes
a genuine interest in how we might design or appropriate technological
devices and processes for gender-political ends. 

Some of the examples that we make reference to in the manifesto include
pharmaceuticals, 3D printing, and open-source software. These phenomena have the
potential to represent remarkable opportunities for the queer, feminist left.
And XF is interested in exploring and leveraging these affordances. 

At the same time, however, XF swerves away from technological determinism. As a
project, it recognizes that technologies are not inherently beneficial -- indeed,
they are not even inherently neutral -- but are in fact constrained by their
specific design histories, by the existing infrastructures into which they
emerge, and by imbalances in terms of who can access them. Technology can only
represent an area of opportunity if we understand that there is a mutually
constitutive relationship between devices, systems, approaches, and the wider
social world. Any emancipatory techno-feminism must therefore be, first and
foremost, a form of political struggle; something that is attentive to the
interlocking structures of oppression, such as race, gender, and class that make
up the material world. So, that is the sense in which we mean the idea of the
word techno-material.

## Anti-Naturalist

The second term that I used to describe the project was 'anti-naturalist'. How
does this apply to XF? Well, it is an anti-naturalist project in the sense that
it frames Nature, and 'the Natural', as a space for contestation (that is, as
within the purview of politics). 

In the manifesto, we claim that nothing should be accepted as fixed, permanent
or given; neither material conditions, nor social forms. Anyone who's been
deemed unnatural in face of reigning biological norms; anyone who's experienced
injustices wrought in the name of the Natural order, will realize that the
glorification of Nature has nothing to offer us. 

This refusal to accept the immutability of Nature is the one element of the XF
project that perhaps resonates most strongly with me personally. Perhaps that's
because it chimes with my background in queer theory, feminist politics, and the
study of sexual dissidence. 

Being anti-naturalist, though, is not the same thing as being against the
natural world. And it is not the same thing as denying the shaping influence of
the biological. XF does not deny that there is a biological stratum to embodied
reality; that certain bodies have different susceptibilities or capacities (most
obviously, the susceptibility and capacity to incubate a fetus). 

What it does dispute, however, is the idea that this stratum is immutable or
fixed, simply because it is biological. On the one hand, this involves
acknowledging the role that social ideas play in understandings of embodiment --
insisting that many of our notions about gendered bodies are to some extent
ideological, for example. More radically, perhaps, it involves framing the
terrain of biology itself as rightfully subject to change. 

Biology is not destiny, as the classic second-wave feminist slogan goes, but
it's not destiny because biology itself can be technologically transformed, and
should be transformed in the pursuit of reproductive justice and the progressive
transformation of gender. XF, then, emphasizes what it sees as the fundamental
mutability of bodies and the fundamental mutability of identities, and is
invested in the disruption of the current sexual order of things. As we put it
in the manifesto, "if Nature is unjust, change Nature!"

## Gender-Abolitionist

One key element of this perspective, and the final characteristic I wish to draw
your attention to, is XF's agitation for the abolition of the binary gender
system. In the manifesto, we argue that the project is gender abolitionist, but
this description, is perhaps a little bit misleading. 

First of all, it does not explicitly encompass the full scope of our ambitions.
It is not just gender that we seek to dismantle, but any structures that come to
act as frequently naturalized and, thus rigidified, bases of oppression. We
believe that traits associated not just with gender, but also with race, class,
able-bodiedness, and so on, are unevenly loaded with social stigma and often
contribute to cultures of inequality. Although the current political value of
mobilizing around these categories does need to be acknowledged, XF argues that,
in the longer term, the full range of these traits should be stripped of their
social significance and therefore of their ability to act as vectors of
discrimination. 

In short, the project seeks to unpick any culturally weaponized markers of
identity that harbor injustices. Secondly, the phrase "gender abolitionism" is
somewhat tricky, as it risks coming across as a demand for the paring back of
gender -- a demand for difference in itself to be abolished. That's not what
we're advocating for at all. If anything, it is the restrictions upon gendered
identities that we want to see scrapped; the tenacious binary thinking that
continues to funnel identities into male and female, feminine and masculine,
despite the obvious paucity of this model. XF is gender-abolitionist in the
sense that we reject the validity of any social order anchored in identities as
a basis of oppression, and in the sense that we embrace sexual diversity beyond
any binary. We advocate for the system of gender difference to be abolished via
the proliferation of gender differences, if that makes sense; and the role of
will within this project is something we may wish to discuss further as we move
forwards. So, my version of xenofeminism is a technomaterialist,
anti-naturalist, gender abolitionist species of feminism. At this point, I'm
going to hand over to my colleague Diann Bauer, who will be adding another
complicating strand to this definition; alienation and/as rationality.

# Alienation and/as Rationality

**DB:** As a way to enter this and to be clear from the start, the xenofeminist
project is one that recognizes that a retreat to small-scale tactics and
localized politics are insufficient given the scale of the problems we face as a
species and much of how must operate now. This is not to say, the work done at a
local scale is unimportant, but XF, is a project, whose focus, rather, is on
systemic conditions. It is at this point a preliminary discursive project. XF
recognizes that possibility of broad reorientation towards social justice will
have to be created by the complex systems in which we live, not despite them.


It is within this context that the idea of a productive alienation becomes very
useful. The text we wrote together in 2015 is called _Xenofeminism: A Politics for
Alienation_ and I would like to clarify what are we talking about here when we
use the word 'alienation'? I'm going to read a bit from the manifesto where this
term is introduced and I will elaborate what we mean.

> XF seizes alienation as an impetus to generate new worlds. We are all alienated
> -- but have we ever been otherwise? It is through, and not despite, our
> alienated condition that we can free ourselves from the muck of immediacy.
> Freedom is not a given -- and it's certainly not given by anything 'natural'.
> The construction of freedom involves not less but more alienation; alienation is
> the labour of freedom's construction. (Laboria Cuboniks, 0x01)

First of all, alienation is a relational term â€“ something or someone is
alienated from someone or something else. As the manifesto, says, we're all
alienated; how we ever been otherwise? The argument is, that as long as we have
been sapient, we've been alienated. 

I'm making a distinction here between sapience and sentience. I take this from
Ray Brassier (from Wilfrid Sellars). I'm using sapience to mean the human
ability to use reason to both reflect and consciously act on our world and by
extension to construct it, while a sentient being is one that has awareness of
their surroundings but not necessarily the capacity to reflect and deliberately
and act on it. 

As we evolved out of 'the muck of immediacy', be this in our evolution as a
species through time or the muck of immediacy of the everyday demands of being a
bit of sentient biology, if given basic conditions for survival, we can do much
more than just maintain that survival. As soon as we could reason beyond our
biological needs and reflect on our finitude we were already alienated. 

But it is this condition that enables us to plan, to plot, to discern; it ought
to be like this for these reasons. It is this form of alienation that has
enabled the species to be as successful as it currently is. And when I say
successful, I'm not making a moral judgement. I just mean our dominance as a
species in the ability to avoid extinction long enough to do some rather amazing
things, like space travel or antibiotics for example. So, on a broad scale, at
the scale of the species, alienation from our biology via sapience is a
productive force. 

The ability as a species to self-reflect and then turn, make and remake what we
are, what is human, is one of the ways XF regards alienation as productive.
There are, however, other forms of alienation that I want to be clear about.
Individual alienation can also be productive; there are, indeed many examples of
individuals that use personal, social or economic alienation to create the new;
to create something better, that wasn't there before; or, indeed, needed
previously. And though, alienation on this scale can be productive, it is not
the kind XF should avow programmatically. Not everyone gets to be the hero that
fought the odds. 

A more common result of this kind of alienation is a slow and grinding dissolve of
individual, political agency. People do not get broken because they are not
strong or heroic enough; they get broken because of a systemic stacking of the
cards. In this context, people succeed despite their alienation and not because
of it. It is important to be clear what kind of alienation we're avowing as well
as how, where and on what scale it functions. 

XF is not a project that avows allowing things to get so bad they will be forced
to get better. Those who suffer most under that sort of logic are often those
who are already the most vulnerable. So while we, as a species, have the
capacity for reason, and the capacity to make what ought to be, we also have the
capacity to construct truly catastrophic conditions that can always exceed our
imaginations of how bad things can get. Perhaps Patricia you would like to add a
few things on this as I know you have also done a lot of work on this idea of
alienation.

# A Mereology of the Will

**PR:** I would like to say a few things on alienation, because I think, that,
ultimately, our aim is to bring this into the direct question of this wonderful
lecture series [the question of will]. As Helen was mentioning, we all have
different roles in this working group, and I think the nomenclature, the naming
of this as a 'working group', is quite important; it is distinct from a
'collective' which typically has one voice. One of the interesting things for
me, personally being involved with this group, is to see/use it as a kind of
exercise in navigating variation (on a humble micro-scale), since a lot of the
time we have different political positions and priorities, so writing a
manifesto together was an exercise in finding ways to thread together different
issues, and find some 'generic' ground between them. 

The second aspect, being the incredible learning curve one encounters when
regularly working with others coming from different fields, and having to
integrate this knowledge. So, our work together is also a kind of game in a
transdisciplinary or synthetic thinking that, I think, we're all going to have
to get adjusted to, to start to cope with the complexity of problems we're
collectively facing since they cannot be isolated in one discipline.
Obviously, ours is but a very small, modest step in that direction, so I'm not
trying to inflate it here either. 

My specific interest in this generative force of alienation is how new
knowledge, new phenomena or concepts that make an appearance in the world, can
change the way we understand ourselves and our position within it. How do they
transform the self-understanding of the human and how does that, in turn,
transform the possibilities for acting in the world and what we would do.

Nowadays, epistemology seems to be in a political crisis, and I think, there is
an urgency to figure out a way to politicize epistemology without dumbing down
such a necessity into a dogmatic scienticism or a fetishization of science
to guide our naive selves. What are the kind of interfaces and tools of
mediation that are required (and in which I think the question of will is hugely
important) to have these new forms of knowledge and knowing, to work upon us, to
transform our self-understanding and have that become collective. Ultimately,
this is equally an ethical program as well, an ethos, a mode of doing, of how we
can/or will intervene in the world and cohabitate with each other ('other' here,
not being exclusively human, either). 

So, within this question of will, the thing that is key to remember is the will,
as a concept, moves between the individual and the collective; and there's a
really nice word that, frankly I've just learned from my colleague, Anke Hennig
â€“ mereology. It's the study of part-to-whole, and part-to-part relations that
form wholes. How does the will become transformed from my personal will to
behaving a certain way, to a collectivized scale? The will is only going to be
minorly effective on the individual scale, so I think it's crucial to understand
how it can scale up. The question of will, then, we could say, requires a
mereological approach.

# The Will as Self-Transformation

**KB:** There are a couple of passages in the manifesto that begin to ferment a
xenofeminist conception of will. The important note to take from these sections,
0x0D specifically, relates the question of will to meme plasticity and
complexity. Lucca will elaborate on these points afterward. To begin, I will
read for us the two paragraphs which can hopefully take us further, and then
will give my own take based on a few key philosophical elements that I think are
important to XF.
 
> If 'cyberspace' once offered the promise of escaping the strictures of
> essentialist identity categories, the climate of contemporary social media has
> swung forcefully in the other direction, and has become a theatre where these
> prostrations to identity are performed. With these curatorial practices come
> puritanical rituals of moral maintenance, and these stages are too often overrun
> with the disavowed pleasures of accusation, shaming, and denunciation. Valuable
> platforms for connection, organization, and skill-sharing become clogged with
> obstacles to productive debate positioned as if they are debate. These
> puritanical politics of shame -- which fetishize oppression as if it were a
> blessing, and cloud the waters in moralistic frenzies -- leave us cold. We want
> neither clean hands nor beautiful souls, neither virtue nor terror. We want
> superior forms of corruption. (Laboria Cuboniks, 0x0C)

> What this shows is that the task of engineering platforms for social
> emancipation and organization cannot ignore the cultural and semiotic mutations
> these platforms afford. What requires reengineering are the memetic parasites
> arousing and coordinating behaviours in ways occluded by their hosts'
> self-image; failing this, memes like 'anonymity', 'ethics', 'social justice' and
> 'privilege-checking' host social dynamisms at odds with the often-commendable
> intentions with which they're taken up. The task of collective self-mastery
> requires a hyperstitional manipulation of desire's puppet-strings, and
> deployment of semiotic operators over a terrain of highly networked cultural
> systems. The will will always be corrupted by the memes in which it traffics,
> but nothing prevents us from instrumentalizing this fact, and calibrating it in
> view of the ends it desires (Laboria Cuboniks, 0x0D)
 
As a preliminary for the dirty work that needs to be done, from my own
perspective I might elaborate on the integrity of will only if we can first
realize, together, that just theorizing about will is not enough. To merely put
the question of will into a theoretical frame is not enough because it requires
a kind of knowing otherwise, through other actions; I believe will has little to
do with the intellect. Will has to become the grounds of an integral
philosophical practice. In other words, the will (to will) is a necessary
element for any pragmatic philosophical vision that puts its 'self-conceptions'
in light with its 'self-transformations' (to borrow two heuristics from Iranian
philosopher Reza Negarestani â€“- but I elaborate here on my own conceptual views).

From the local perspective, the will will look like the exercise of a global
integrity, as a necessary precursor to developing dignity, which is fully
knowable when the agent is capable of embodying its global commitments as they
are understood through the entangled particularities which call upon them
(particularities which call upon the global commitments or the universal). This
is not to say there is no struggle, no hiccup, no discontinuity, or no
overturning of the universal for the willing or willed, given any
self-conception or conception in general has gravity that weighs heavy
over-time, especially when local commitments get tried or contradict the
performance of a global transformation.
 
I speak in very abstract terms here, but we can see that this pragmatic
understanding of will has a strong relation to historicity. Furthermore, it
stands to reason for any collective project since historicity implies the
co-existence of multiple commitments which are requisite for an out-growth of
scalable cooperations. Tensions inevitably arise within any project if it
becomes overly self-identified, as its unfolding necessitates small
perturbations resultant from local contingencies and experimental contradictions
in the make-up of the self-conception. 

Thus, seeing the will as without self becomes an even more effective means for
engaging with it as a relational process, wherein multi-layering of
temporalities, transformations, and even multiple contradictions, transform the
form of a 'collaboration' into a fully embodied project of collective
self-mastery. Indeed, an abundance of propositions begins to override the
neurotic impulse to pin down a single concept when the stakes for transformation
are more clear and more important. Notice I still use the word 'self' in
self-conception and 'self' in self-transformation while referring to a 'will
without self'. This is because there must be a certain degree of
representational performative flexibility in the operation of will â€“â€“ a kind of
generative 'shadow-self' that enables memetic plasticity to take place.
 
Finally, there is an aesthetic dimension to will (an ethos, perhaps), which
involves courage, or the desire to recognize struggle and to corrupt all
disempowering reactionary thinking. The aesthetic dimension is precisely where
histories of intelligence become creative functions of revolutions: in other
words, the aesthetic dimension of will involves: firstly, how will is the
envelopment of time or temporalities (and self-transformations); secondly, how
will is the envelopment of objectivity, to hopefully include multiple
perspectives into the experiential; and thirdly, more generally, how will
involves a co-composition or engineering of form, 'co-' given all the conditions
and relations that give rise to a will under consideration.
 
I leave the rest to Lucca now.

<a name="corruption"></a>

# Superior Forms of Corruption

**LF:** I suppose the thread where I want to pick up is just where Katrina left
off, that 

> The will will always be corrupted by the memes in which it traffics,
> but nothing prevents us from instrumentalizing this fact, and calibrating it in
> view of the ends it desires. 

Classically, we distinguish will from "want", or desire, or appetite. So, will
is this desire that can grasp itself, that can reason about itself
transparently. You have this kind of self-presence of desire to itself. It is a
desire that masters itself. This is the kind of classical image of will. And
this is very much a heroic vision -- the subject in total transparency, clear of
his own intention projecting them forward into to future that will then be
molded by this image. 

But we all agree that there is something dangerous about this. And this isn't
something new, this is something that has been under critique for decades and
decades, centuries even. But, I suppose our project is still trying to find what
do we want; some sort of notion of collective self-control. We want some notion
of being able to articulate these ambitious projects in a world that is noisy
and chaotic and indeterminate. We don't want to just capitulate, just abandon
these notions, just because they're sort of bogged down with this kind of heroic
mythology, that makes them a constant hazard. So, the will, is not the moment
where the desire or the agent can grasp themselves with completely transparency
and presence. It is not the moment where you have complete control -- even if
these moments exist and if we grant for the sake of argument that they do, at
very best, they are very rare and very fragile. They are also almost always
blind. The will has a certain opacity to itself.

So, what we want to do then, is to look at the ways in which agency can grasp
itself not on the side of its transparency or its presence to itself, but on the
side of its laziness and its stupidity and the ways in which it's carried along
by tides that it doesn't control, tides that its heroic self-image obscures.
Every sort of great heroic quest of the will is at sail on the sea in a storm
but now incentives that will sway and corrupt it do this unnoticed. And so,
if corruption is a given, then corruption should be our medium. Corruption
should the be clay that we to operate on. 

And so how do we find, what is this superior form of corruption? The most basic
particles of this corruption are just, like we said, the memes in which the will
traffics, these little cultural fragments that hook into our behavior and our
psyches with these little tendrils of incentivization that mostly go unnoticed.
And so, we mean this in a totally clichÃ© way -- the sense in which people say,
"money corrupts", or "power corrupts". This is the sort of corruption that we're
starting with here, hoping to expand it. 

So, first of all, what is a meme? A meme is something that is everyone at least
passingly familiar with. And, you know, because it became a very popularized
term, like, the internet meme, and so on, then, of course we want to go back a
little bit to the notion of a meme as what Dawkins or Susan Blackmore called
this "second replicator". Think of what a gene is. What does something have to
be for it to be subject to evolution? What do you need in order to have a
Darwinist process? You only need a few things (which is the beauty of
Darwinism). You need replication, mutation and selection. And if you have these
three things, you're good. 

These are such abstract parameters that we can even instantiate them
artificially -- and this is something we often do in machine learning, in a
field called evolutionary computation. We create these completely artificial,
completely engineered situations in which evolution isn't just simulated, but
occurs, in which you create populations of programs and you set conditions for
their fitness, you set the right algorithms for mutation, and sexual or asexual
reproduction and you let this just spin for a number of generations until it
converges on a solution to a problem that you couldn't have scripted out in
advance. You know what a correct solution might look like, at least
approximately, but you have no way of getting there, so you use a
machine-learning approach to take advantage of noise and this randomness, and
you find the solution in very vast and complicated problem space. And, I think
there are strategies coming from this, that can be tremendously informative
politically.

Memes are fragments of behavior, of cultural production, if you like, that can
be repeated with some degree of fidelity, that can be variated or mutated and
that there is a selection pressure on. And so, like the internet meme is a good
example of this, that, sort of, dramatizes this; it's a beautiful little
self-reflective dramatization of this, but is only a small case. So, how do
these things move, then, within their environment -- when their environment is
human behavior, fueled, for the most part, by human desire? They need ways to
hook into us, if they're going to thrive. Ways to coax us towards their
replication and preservation, which means that the survivors -- the "fittest"
memes -- are the ones that have ways of incentivizing us to reproduce them. This
is another instance of the evolutionary process.

We have one hand the genetic evolution that we are a part of -- this roughly
arboreal, vertical descent -- but at some point, in Earth's history, this
process was cross-cut by another, where you see the evolution of memes, of the
memetic sphere. These fragments have been transported horizontally across the
human population. We are its environment. And in order to thrive, they needed to
nudge and carve that little ecosystem in us, the way that we have to on Earth
and the way that every organism has to in its environment.


This is the basic explanatory framework of memetics, kicked off by Richard
Dawkins and developed at greater length by Susan Blackmore and others. And there
are some really fascinating conjectures that like this dramatic encephalation of
humans... that they needed hosts with large brains and so this became us.
Whatever a meme could sort of encourage their population to favor brain size and
cognitive capacity for selection, those would tend to be more likely to thrive,
down the line. So, there is leaning on that works the way a good parasite does
with its host; and think of the really interesting parasites like toxoplasma, or
the rhizocephala barnacle. So, toxoplasma, one of the things it does, is that it
infects the brain of a mouse it plays around out there, mucking around in the
nervous system, and it gives the mouse a particular taste for danger and an
excitement, and a fascination, in particular, with cats. The mouse then develops
an almost erotic attraction to cat urine and so it becomes much more likely to
be eaten by a cat, which is a migration toxoplasma optimizes for.

Then you have the Rhizocephalan barnacle which is a barnacle organism but
infects crabs. So, it infects a crab and spreads its root-like "head" through
the crab's circulatory system, and then hijacks its endocrine system. If the
crab is male, the barnacle feminizes it. It develops an egg-like sack on the
back, and then will then infect the crab's offspring. What's really interesting
is that the barnacle predisposes the crab to show favoritism towards the
offspring that are, themselves, infected by the barnacle. I'm working up to an
analogy here.

I think this is the way that memeplexes operate, through human behavior,
discourse and communities.

This is the approach I'm interested in taking right now, if we are going to
examine the ways in which we mobilize a political program, for example, or we
have a behavior we want to encourage, or if we want to look at how these various
political platforms operate. The heroic approach is to look at our intentions
and at our advertised self-image, the way we see ourselves. And you know,
there's a limitation to this. One is that, in maintaining this heroic ego --
this is what we're doing, this is what is right, what we will achieve -- misses,
I think, the ways in which the will is not just accidentally corrupted, but the
way these memeplexes can move from one host to another, by taking advantage of
these little subtle corruptions and incentives.

So, suppose you have a progressive political program, which sounds good, which
is full of noble causes, and its content is wonderful, but its pragmatic hooks
are inherited from a far older and more repressive memeplex -- Puritanism, for
example -- incentivising its hosts to propagate it through mechanisms like
shaming and denunciation and so on. The manifest content benefits -- in terms of
propagation -- from this symbiosis with an older, tougher species of memeplex.
It benefits from having all these little hooks that will capture attention,
encourage adoption and provoke response. These aspects, which in order to be
effective are better kept implicit, are going to be selected for so long as they
hasten propagation and encourage survival, even though they often operate in
ways entirely contrary to the memeplex's manifest content -- its progressive
message. Now, the manifest content, or 'ego' of the memeplex, isn't completely
ineffectual or empty. It is, itself, a cluster of memes that need to survive and
influence their environment. There are a number of actions happening there, but
the danger there is that you have malignant behaviors that are selected for more
strongly, because they attach to more immediately pressing incentive hooks. This
is how you get memetic colonies that appear to be acting against their own
stated interests. You have "corrupting" influences operating at cross-purposes
with the manifest, heroic mission for which they are the vehicle.

So, there is this conflict there that, I think, has to be addressed, that can't
be addressed through this heroic image of the will. It demands this, sort of,
*counter-heroics*. A sort of meditation on the will that is constantly attentive
to corruption. Not to eliminate corruption... if our brains were, and this might
be a bit speculative here, selected for... our large gooey brains, constantly
chattering to themselves, that dream, that yammer, that expend energy in ways
that are virtually useless in terms of genetic selection ... they are not the
sort of things that are going to be able to embark on such a pure and heroic
path. But the thing is, if we can just understand how the memetic ecology that
we work in operates, then maybe we can develop better techniques for
manipulating that ecology. Find ways to work it that may be more productive and
interesting.

And one of the things that I've been curious about -- partly just because I like
to, think about everything I'm working on at once, and have a bit of a
compulsion to transfer analogies from one domain I have my foot in over to
another -- is to approach this problem of crafting better corruptive spheres of
influence, of re-engineering the memetic ooze we swim in, and ask if we can
treat this as a sort of artificial environment. To approach these problems the
way we would in evolutionary computation, or genetic programming. I don't mean
the programming of DNA, I mean the use of natural selection as a computational
algorithm, for evolving programs that converge on unknown optima in a certain
problem space. Can we treat the wonderfully rich cross-hatching of our
evolutionary process that the memes bring us into -- can we treat this as
something that we can then engineer, the way we would approach analogous
problems in machine learning? Can we treat our environment of memetic
corruptions and incentives as a sort of artificial intelligence that we can then
train, or engineer? (Not necessarily an artificial intelligence, but a swarm of
artificial intelligences.)

And this is the other thing, in computer science, when we use genetic
programming and we take this approach â€“- it is a sub-discipline of
machine-learning which is used to solve problems for which there are typically
no known, tractable deterministic solutions, and is used to do something that
approximates what we call learning when we see it in humans. And, so, to
sort of, understand how this might work -â€“ if anyone ever took, like, a philosophy
101, you've probably read the various arguments for the existence of god; you
probably know the theological argument that supposes that you find a watch on a
beach, that obviously looks like it's a product of intelligent design, and you'd
be crazy to think it was produced randomly, blah, blah, blah, therefore God
exists. You know, it all seems silly, and all that, but there's an insight
there, which is: _blind selective evolutionary processes *do* approximate what
we call intelligence_.

And if there is such a thing as collective intelligence, it's not some hive
mind, not this kind of Borg of consciousness, or human brains wired together (not
yet, anyway). It is this blind swarm of memetic activity. This is, I think,
where the dimension of collective intelligence exists. It's mad, it's utterly
insane most of the time, but there is an intelligence there -- a kind of blind,
Darwinian intelligence. So, if that is the vehicle of our collective activity.
If we can understand, and, sort of, predict behavior in the ways in which you
can complex political movements and so on, we can maybe try to train that
intelligence to do things that we would actually want it to do; to align it with
the manifest object of our will; objects that we think we want.

That would be a long circuitous path through counter-heroics to something that
heroism has failed to achieve. And it doesn't move through the medium of
transparency, but through opacity. It doesn't move through the medium of
self-determining freedom, but through the medium of heterogeneous randomness or
noise. This can be the medium, I think, for our collective emancipation, if we
learn to approach certain large-scale problems with this mindset.


**PR:** Just to summarize a bit, since I'm just a front-end, and not a
hardcore programmer, to tie this into a general picture, I really want to
highlight your mentioning of counter-heroics because that is, definitely
something that we've been advocating, in the sense that a diversity of
disciplines is required to even start examining these problematic objects. This
is definitely a non-revolutionary position (but not, non-transformative), so,
just to point that out, that these modes of transformation are distinct from
"evental-based" ones, which I don't think are adequate to our complex entangled
times, where political power operates in a tetra-headed fashion, and within
neoliberalism, oftentimes, even from within oneself (with the 'no society' model
becoming an imperative for individual responsibility/culpability across the
spectrum of life).


Ultimately, for the follow-through on substantial socio-political transformation
(which is equally a normative transformation), this requires long-term
engagement and organizational innovations that can host these transformations.
It requires a profound endurance that may even span many generations. The main
element that I'd like to extract from your description is this procedural aspect
of it.


A meme requires uptake. You can launch something in the world and it can just
die and there is no definitive way of knowing what is going to stick and what's
not; there are a whole bunch of contingencies. I think it is really important to
distinguish it from this previous heroic notion of will which will be often tied
to a revolutionary temporality and to a definitive telos, a goal. What the
counter-heroic procedure advocates is a probabilistic approach where you start
to seed the future in a way -- which crucially demands that we start to speculate
on ideas of 'betterment', of who/what contributes to this conceptualization and
how this concept of 'betterment' is modeled -- but knowing that it cannot be
fully determined and integrating this contingency as a necessary part of
reality. So just to point out how this counter-heroic functioning of the will,
also structurally changes the political horizons that would be afforded to it.


**DB:** I keep getting stuck on that crab. My identification keeps oscillating
between on the one hand, on a metaphorical level, with the Rhizocephalan
barnacle, the thing that is infecting the crab, so looking to it as an example
of how to change a system through infecting it, and on the other hand,
identifying with the crab. Knowing that we are a biological system subject to
all kinds of influences, many of which are dramatic yet we are none the less,
quite unaware of them.


**LF:** Humanity is like the infected crab. That's what we are.


**DB:** Yeah, but my sympathies keep oscillating. Knowing we are still stuck in
the bit of biology that has needs and vulnerabilities, but also capacities to... I
suppose to construct will on behalf of a collective, rather than just our
drives, just our biology but none the less knowing we are always, on some level,
subject to that biology. I just keep going back and forth.


**LF:** I just think this is a good metaphor that we're neither 'humanity'
nor whatever humanity becomes. It's neither the barnacle, nor the crab, but
the interface between them. Humanity, if I had to come with one definition from
the top of my head, is that evolutionary process that's cross-cut between
arboreal genetic selection and rhizomatic memetic selection. It is the ways in
which these two processes jus tolerate each other or exploit each other. And
there are the little, you know, indeterminacies that gave us these little
flickering gaps of negative freedom from nature. This is what is because we are
this this sort of juncture between these two, kind of, you know natural-ish
processes. I think this is, kind of, what keeps nature fractured for us. 


**DB:** I suppose that difficulty there was how do we make the more convincing and
infectious memes? because there needs to be lots of alternate ones working in
the same direction becuase many of them won't go anywhere but if you make enough
in the direction you want to take things politically, something might get
through.


**LF:** I think this is something that has been missing from lot of leftist
political thought -- attention to the little, subtle incentivization structures.
What the left is very good at is imagining their telos, the target they aim at,
but they are less attentive to these little nudges that will bring us there. And
of course we all have these little nudges, which means that the corruption won't
be on our side; that we will be operating in ways contrary to those projections
and, that is, I mean, a hugely open problem, i.e., thinking about that small,
subtle scale, thinking about that little things, and about what is
probabilistically influenced behavior, one way or the other.
